# GeoModel Version 0.1 Specification

The first release version of GeoModel will be a minimum viable product (MVP)
containing features that replace the functionality of the
[existing implementation](https://github.com/ameihm0912/geomodel) along with a
few new requirements.

## Terminology

**Locality**

The locality of a user is a geographical region from which most of that user's
online activity originates.

## Primary Interface

GeoModel v0.1 is an alert built into MozDef that:

  1. Processes authentication-related events.
  2. Updates user locality information.
  3. Emits alerts when some specific conditions are met.

### Data Stores

GeoModel interacts with MozDef to both query for events as well as store new
alerts.

GeoModel also maintains its own user locality information.  Version 0.1 will
store this information in the same ElasticSearch instance that MozDef uses,
under a configured index.

### Functional Components

GeoModel v0.1 can be thought of as consisting of two core "components" that are
each responsible for a distinct set of responsibilities.  These two components
interact in a pipeline.

```
[MozDef ES] --> [Analysis Engine] --> [Alert Emitter] --> [MozDef ES]
```

**ES** = ElasticSearch

#### Analysis Engine

The first component handles the analysis of events pertaining to authenticated
actions made by users.  These events are retrieved from MozDef and analyzed to
determine locality of users which is then persisted in a data store.

This component has the following responsibilities:

  1. Run configured queries to retrieve events describing authenticated actions
  taken by users from MozDef.
  2. Load locality state from ElasticSearch.
  3. Remove outdated locality information.
  4. Update locality state with information from retrieved events.

#### Alert Emitter

The second component handles the creation of alerts and communicating of those
alerts to MozDef.

This component has the following responsibilities:

  1. Inspect localities produced by the Analysis Engine to produce alerts.
  2. Store alerts in MozDef's ElasticSearch instance.

The Alert Emitter will, given a set of localities for a user, produce an alert
if and only if both:
  
  1. User activity is found to originate from a location outside of all
  previously known localities.
  2. It would **not** be possible for the user to have travelled to a new
  locality from the one they were last active in.

### Data Models

The following models describe what data is required to implement the features
that each component is responsible for.  They are described using a JSON-based
format where keys indicidate the names of values and values are strings
containing those values' types, which are represented using [TypeScript](
https://www.typescriptlang.org/docs/handbook/advanced-types.html) notation.
We use this notation because configuration data as well as data stored in
ElasticSearch are represented as JSON and JSON-like objects respectively.

#### General Configuration

The top-level configuration for GeoModel version 0.1 must contain the
following.

```typescript
{
  "localities": {
    "index": string,
    "validDurationHours": number,
    "radiusKilometres": number
  },
  "events": {
    "index": string,
    "queries": Array<{
      "lucene": string,
      "username": string
    }>
  },
  "alerts": {
    "index": string
  }
}
```

Using the information above, GeoModel can determine:

  * What index to store locality documents in.
  * What index to read events from.
  * What index to write alerts to.
  * What queries to run in order to retrieve a complete set of events.
  * When a user locality is considered outdated and should be removed.
  * The radius that localities should have.

In the above, note that `events.queries` describes an array of objects. Each of
these objects are expected to be a query for ElasticSearch using
[Lucene syntax](http://www.lucenetutorial.com/lucene-query-syntax.html).  The
`username` field is meant to be a string describing the path into
the result dictionary your query will return that will produce the username of
the user taking an authenticated action.

So for example the following:

```json
{
  "events": {
    "index": "events-*",
    "queries": [
      {
        "lucene": "tags:auth0",
        "username": "details.username"
      }
    ]
  }
}
```

would query ElasticSearch for all events tagged `auth0` and try to extract
the `username` from `results["details"]["username"]`.

#### User Locality State

GeoModel version 0.1 uses one ElasticSearch Type (similar to a table in a
relational database) to represent locality information.  Under this type,
one document exists per user describing that user's locality information.

```typescript
{
  "username": string,
  "localities": Array<{
    "sourceipv4address": string,
    "city": string,
    "country": string,
    "lastaction": date,
    "latitude": number,
    "longitude": number,
    "radius": number
  }>
}
```

Using the information above, GeoModel can determine:

* All of the localities of a user.
* Whether a locality is older than some amount of time.
* How far outside of any localities a given location is.

#### Alerts

Alerts emitted to the configured index are intended to cohere to MozDef's
preferred naming scheme.

```typescript
{
  "source": "geomodel",
  "category": "geomodel",
  "type": "geomodel",
  "username": string,
  "sourceipv4address": string,
  "timestamp": date,
  "origin": {
    "city": string,
    "country": string,
    "latitude": number,
    "longitude": number
  },
  "tags": ["geomodel"],
  "summary": string,
}
```

## User Stories

User stories here make references to the following categories of users:

  * An **operator** is anyone responsible for deploying or maintaining a
  deployment of MozDef that includes GeoModel.
  * An **investigator** is anyone responsible for viewing and taking action
  based on alerts emitted by GeoModel.

**Potential Compromises Detected**

As an investigator, I expect that if a user is found to have performed some
authenticated action in one location and then, some short amount of time later,
in another that an alert will be emitted by GeoModel.

**Realistic Travel Excluded**

As an investigator, I expect that if someone starts working somehwere, gets
on a plane and continues working after arriving in their destination that an
alert will **not** be emitted by GeoModel.

**Diversity of Indicators**

As an operator, I expect that GeoModel will fetch events pertaining to
authenticated actions from new sources (Duo, Auth0, etc.) after I deploy
MozDef with GeoModel configured with queries targeting those sources.

**Old Data Removed Automatically**

As an operator, I expect that  GeoModel will forget about localities attributed
to users that have not been in those geographic regions for a configured amount
of time.
